[GSoD]  Added tutorials directory on gRPC-Gateway (#1829)
grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway: docs/docs/tutorials/adding_annotations.md

Before we can do that, we need to copy some dependencies into our protofile structure. Copy the `third_party/googleapis` folder from the grpc-gateway repository to your local protofile structure. It should look like this afterwards:

```
proto
├── google
│   └── api
│       ├── annotations.proto
│       └── http.proto
└── helloworld
    └── hello_world.proto
```

#### Using buf

We'll need to add the grpc-gateway generator to the generation configuration:

```yml
plugins:
  - name: go
    out: proto
    opt: paths=source_relative
  - name: go-grpc
    out: proto
    opt: paths=source_relative
  - name: grpc-gateway
    out: proto
    opt: paths=source_relative
```

And that's it! Now if you run:

```sh
buf generate
```

It should produce a `*.gw.pb.go` file.

#### Using protoc

Now we need to add the grpc-gateway generator to the protoc invocation:

```sh
protoc -I ./proto \
  --go_out ./proto --go_opt paths=source_relative \
  --go-grpc_out ./proto --go-grpc_opt paths=source_relative \
  --grpc-gateway_out ./proto --grpc-gateway_opt paths=source_relative \
  ./proto/helloworld/hello_world.proto
```

This should generate a `*.gw.pb.go` file.

> 

Reviewer: This still needs to be added.

---
layout: default
title: Adding the grpc-gateway annotations to an existing protobuf file
parent: Tutorials
nav_order: 5
---

# Adding the grpc-gateway annotations to an existing protobuf file

Now that we've got a working Go gRPC server, we need to add the grpc-gateway annotations.

The annotations define how gRPC services map to the JSON request and response. When using protocol buffers, each RPC must define the HTTP method and path using the `google.api.http` annotation.

> So you will need to add `import "google/api/http.proto";` to the gRPC proto file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we will need to add the `google/api/http.proto` import to the proto file. We also need to add the HTTP->gRPC mapping we want. In this case, we're mapping `POST /v1/example/echo` to our `SayHello` rpc.
```

```proto
syntax = "proto3";

package helloworld;

import "google/api/annotations.proto";

// Here is the overall greeting service definition where we define all our endpoints
service Greeter {
  // Sends a greeting
  rpc SayHello (HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply) {
    option (google.api.http) = {
      post: "/v1/example/echo"
      body: "*"
    };
  }
}

// The request message containing the user's name
message HelloRequest {
  string name = 1;
}

// The response message containing the greetings
message HelloReply {
  string message = 1;
}
```

> HttpRule is typically specified as an `google.api.http` annotation on the gRPC method. Each mapping specifies a URL path template and an HTTP method.
> 
> Also, See [a_bit_of_everything.proto](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/blob/master/examples/internal/proto/examplepb/a_bit_of_everything.proto) for examples of more annotations you can add to customize gateway behavior and generated OpenAPI output.

Reviewer: This language is a bit complicated I think.
```suggestion
ASee [a_bit_of_everything.proto](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/blob/master/examples/internal/proto/examplepb/a_bit_of_everything.proto) for examples of more annotations you can add to customize gateway behavior.
```

```
proto
├── google
│   └── api
│       ├── annotations.proto
│       └── http.proto
└── helloworld
    └── hello_world.proto
```

### Using buf

We'll need to add the grpc-gateway generator to the generation configuration:

```yml
version: v1beta1
plugins:
  - name: go
    out: proto
    opt: paths=source_relative
  - name: go-grpc
    out: proto
    opt: paths=source_relative,require_unimplemented_servers=false
  - name: grpc-gateway
    out: proto
    opt: paths=source_relative
```

And that's it! Now if you run:

```sh
$ buf generate
```

It should produce a `*.gw.pb.go` file.

### Using protoc

Now we need to add the grpc-gateway generator to the protoc invocation:

```sh
$ protoc -I ./proto \
  --go_out ./proto --go_opt paths=source_relative \
  --go-grpc_out ./proto --go-grpc_opt paths=source_relative \
  --grpc-gateway_out ./proto --grpc-gateway_opt paths=source_relative \
  ./proto/helloworld/hello_world.proto
```

This should generate a `*.gw.pb.go` file.

> Usage examples can be found on this [Usage](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway#usage)

Reviewer: Lets remove this line, it seems a bit disconnected from the rest of the content.
```suggestion
```

> ### In addition to the main.go

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also need to add and serve the gRPC-gateway mux in our `main.go` file.
```

```go
package gateway

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"net/http"
	"os"
	"strings"

	"github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/v2/runtime"

> 	helloworldpb "github.com/iamrajiv/helloworld/proto/helloworld"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	helloworldpb "github.com/myuser/myrepo/proto/helloworld"
```

> 	"github.com/prometheus/common/log"

Reviewer: This shouldn't be here. I think it was probably added by goimports.
```suggestion
```

	return &helloworldpb.HelloReply{Message: in.Name + " World"}, nil
}
func main() {
	lis, err := net.Listen("tcp", ":8080")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln("Failed to listen:", err)
	}
	s := grpc.NewServer()
	helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterServer(s, &server{})
	// Serve gRPC Server
	log.Println("Serving gRPC on 0.0.0.0:8080")
	go func() {
		log.Fatalln(s.Serve(lis))
	}()
	// Create a client connection to the gRPC Server we just started.
	// This is where the gRPC-Gateway proxies the requests.
	conn, err := grpc.DialContext(
		context.Background(),
		"0.0.0.0:8080",

> 		grpc.WithBlock(),
> 	)

Reviewer: My bad, I forgot to say, we need to set `grpc.WithInsecure()` here
```suggestion
		grpc.WithBlock(),
		grpc.WithInsecure(),
	)
```

> package main
> import (
> 	"context"
> 	"io/ioutil"
> 	"net"
> 	"os"
> 	"log"
> 	"google.golang.org/grpc"
> 	"github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/v2/runtime"
> 	helloworldpb "github.com/myuser/myrepo/proto/helloworld"
> )
> type server struct{}
> func NewServer() *server {
> 	return &server{}
> }
> func (s *server) SayHello(ctx context.Context, in *helloworldpb.HelloRequest) (*helloworldpb.HelloReply, error) {
> 	return &helloworldpb.HelloReply{Message: in.Name + " World"}, nil
> }
> func main() {
> 	lis, err := net.Listen("tcp", ":8080")
> 	if err != nil {
> 		log.Fatalln("Failed to listen:", err)
> 	}
> 	s := grpc.NewServer()
> 	helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterServer(s, &server{})
> 	// Serve gRPC Server
> 	log.Println("Serving gRPC on 0.0.0.0:8080")
> 	go func() {
> 		log.Fatalln(s.Serve(lis))
> 	}()
> 	// Create a client connection to the gRPC Server we just started.
> 	// This is where the gRPC-Gateway proxies the requests.
> 	conn, err := grpc.DialContext(
> 		context.Background(),
> 		"0.0.0.0:8080",
> 		grpc.WithBlock(),
> 	)
> 	if err != nil {
> 		log.Fatalln("Failed to dial server:", err)
> 	}
> 	gwmux := runtime.NewServeMux()
> 	err = helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterHandler(context.Background(), gwmux, conn)
> 	if err != nil {
> 		log.Fatalln("Failed to register gateway:", err)
> 	}
> 	gwServer := &http.Server{
> 		Addr: ":8090",
> 		Handler: gwmux,
> 	}
> 	log.Println("Serving gRPC-Gateway on http://0.0.0.0:8090")
> 	log.Fatalln(gwServer.ListenAndServe())
> }

Reviewer: I'd like to add a bit of newlines to break up some of the logic and imports
```suggestion
package main
import (
	"context"
	"io/ioutil"
	"net"
	"os"
	"log"

	"google.golang.org/grpc"
	"github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/v2/runtime"

	helloworldpb "github.com/myuser/myrepo/proto/helloworld"
)

type server struct{}

func NewServer() *server {
	return &server{}
}

func (s *server) SayHello(ctx context.Context, in *helloworldpb.HelloRequest) (*helloworldpb.HelloReply, error) {
	return &helloworldpb.HelloReply{Message: in.Name + " World"}, nil
}

func main() {
	lis, err := net.Listen("tcp", ":8080")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln("Failed to listen:", err)
	}

	s := grpc.NewServer()
	helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterServer(s, &server{})
	// Serve gRPC Server
	log.Println("Serving gRPC on 0.0.0.0:8080")
	go func() {
		log.Fatalln(s.Serve(lis))
	}()

	// Create a client connection to the gRPC Server we just started.
	// This is where the gRPC-Gateway proxies the requests.
	conn, err := grpc.DialContext(
		context.Background(),
		"0.0.0.0:8080",
		grpc.WithBlock(),
	)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln("Failed to dial server:", err)
	}

	gwmux := runtime.NewServeMux()
	err = helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterHandler(context.Background(), gwmux, conn)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln("Failed to register gateway:", err)
	}

	gwServer := &http.Server{
		Addr: ":8090",
		Handler: gwmux,
	}

	log.Println("Serving gRPC-Gateway on http://0.0.0.0:8090")
	log.Fatalln(gwServer.ListenAndServe())
}
```

> package gateway
> 
> import (
> 	"context"
> 	"fmt"
> 	"net/http"
> 	"os"
> 	"strings"
> 
> 	"github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/v2/runtime"
> 	helloworldpb "github.com/iamrajiv/helloworld/proto/helloworld"
> 	"github.com/prometheus/common/log"
> 	"google.golang.org/grpc"
> )
> 
> // Run runs the gRPC-Gateway, dialling the provided address.
> func Run(dialAddr string) error {
> 	// Create a client connection to the gRPC Server we just started.
> 	// This is where the gRPC-Gateway proxies the requests.
> 	conn, err := grpc.DialContext(
> 		context.Background(),
> 		dialAddr,
> 		grpc.WithBlock(),
> 	)
> 	if err != nil {
> 		return fmt.Errorf("failed to dial server: %w", err)
> 	}
> 
> 	gwmux := runtime.NewServeMux()
> 	err = helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterHandler(context.Background(), gwmux, conn)
> 	if err != nil {
> 		return fmt.Errorf("failed to register gateway: %w", err)
> 	}
> 
> 	port := os.Getenv("PORT")
> 	if port == "" {
> 		port = "11000"
> 	}
> 	gatewayAddr := "0.0.0.0:" + port
> 	gwServer := &http.Server{
> 		Addr: gatewayAddr,
> 		Handler: http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
> 			if strings.HasPrefix(r.URL.Path, "") {
> 				gwmux.ServeHTTP(w, r)
> 				return
> 			}
> 		}),
> 	}
> 	log.Info("Serving gRPC-Gateway and OpenAPI Documentation on http://", gatewayAddr)
> 	return fmt.Errorf("serving gRPC-Gateway server: %w", gwServer.ListenAndServe())
> }
> ```

Reviewer: I was hoping we could just merge the existing main.go with the gateway here, not just paste the "Run" method. That's not very useful to the user. I've got a suggestion here, can you apply this and try to run it yourself?
```suggestion
package main

import (
	"context"
	"io/ioutil"
	"net"
	"os"
	"log"

	"google.golang.org/grpc"
	"github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway/v2/runtime"

	helloworldpb "github.com/myuser/myrepo/proto/helloworld"
)

type server struct{}

func NewServer() *server {
	return &server{}
}

func (s *server) SayHello(ctx context.Context, in *helloworldpb.HelloRequest) (*helloworldpb.HelloReply, error) {
	return &helloworldpb.HelloReply{Message: in.Name + " World"}, nil
}

func main() {
	lis, err := net.Listen("tcp", ":8080")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln("Failed to listen:", err)
	}
	s := grpc.NewServer()
	helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterServer(s, &server{})
	// Serve gRPC Server
	log.Println("Serving gRPC on 0.0.0.0:8080")
	go func() {
		log.Fatalln(s.Serve(lis))
	}()

	// Create a client connection to the gRPC Server we just started.
	// This is where the gRPC-Gateway proxies the requests.
	conn, err := grpc.DialContext(
		context.Background(),
		"0.0.0.0:8080",
		grpc.WithBlock(),
	)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln("Failed to dial server:", err)
	}

	gwmux := runtime.NewServeMux()
	err = helloworldpb.RegisterGreeterHandler(context.Background(), gwmux, conn)
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatalln("Failed to register gateway:", err)
	}
	gwServer := &http.Server{
		Addr: ":8090",
		Handler: gwmux,
	}
	log.Println("Serving gRPC-Gateway on http://0.0.0.0:8090")
	log.Fatalln(gwServer.ListenAndServe())
}
''' (backticks)
```

> For more refer to this boilerplate repository [grpc-gateway-boilerplate
> ](https://github.com/johanbrandhorst/grpc-gateway-boilerplate)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more examples, please refer to [our boilerplate repository](https://github.com/johanbrandhorst/grpc-gateway-boilerplate).
```

## Testing the gRPC-Gateway

> Then we use curl to send HTTP requests:

Reviewer: We need to run the server first

```suggestion
Now we can start the server:
''' (backticks)
$ go run main.go
'''

Then we use curl to send HTTP requests:
```

```sh

> $ curl -X POST -k http://localhost:8080/v1/example/echo -d '{"name": " Hello"}'

Reviewer: This needs to be 8090 now (I changed the port above)
```suggestion
$ curl -X POST -k http://localhost:8090/v1/example/echo -d '{"name": " Hello"}'
```

```sh
$ curl -X POST -k http://localhost:8090/v1/example/echo -d '{"name": " Hello"}'
```

```
{"message":"Hello  World"}
```

> The process is as follows:

Reviewer: Probably forgot to remove this
```suggestion
```

> The process is as follows:
> 
> `curl` sends a request to the gateway with the post, gateway as proxy forwards the request to greeter_server through grpc, greeter_server returns the result through grpc, the gateway receives the result, and JSON returns to the front end.
> 
> In this way, the transformation process from HTTP JSON to internal grpc is completed through gRPC-Gateway.

Reviewer: Lets move this explanation into the "Learn more section".
```suggestion
Hopefully that gives a bit of understanding of how to use the gRPC Gateway!
```

---
layout: default
title: Adding the grpc-gateway annotations to an existing protobuf file
parent: Tutorials
nav_order: 6
---

> ## Adding the grpc-gateway annotations to an existing protobuf file

Reviewer: We're missing a lot of information here.
```suggestion
## Adding the grpc-gateway annotations to an existing protobuf file

Now that we've got a working Go gRPC server, we need to add the grpc-gateway annotations:

< insert hello_world.proto with http annotations>

### Generating the grpc-gateway stubs

Now that we've got the grpc-gateway annotations added to the proto file, we need to use the grpc-gateway generator to generate the stubs.

Before we can do that, we need to copy some dependencies into our protofile structure. Copy the `third_party/googleapis` folder from the grpc-gateway repository to your local protofile structure. It should look like this afterwards:

''' (backticks)
proto/
    helloworld/
        hello_world.proto
    google/
        api/
            http.proto
            annotations.proto
''' (backticks)

#### Using buf
<how to add the generation using buf>

#### Using protoc
<how to add the generation using protoc>
```

I think you get the idea.

Start the greeter_server service first, and then start the gateway. Then gateway connects to greeter_server and establishes http monitoring.

Then we use curl to send http requests:

```sh
curl -X POST -k http://localhost:8080/v1/example/echo -d '{"name": " world"}
```

```
{"message":"Hello  world"}
```

The process is as follows:

curl sends a request to the gateway with the post, gateway as proxy forwards the request to greeter_server through grpc, greeter_server returns the result through grpc, the gateway receives the result, and json returns to the front end.

> In this way, the transformation process from http json to internal grpc is completed through grpc-gateway.

Reviewer: We'll need to talk about how to update the `main.go` to use the generated types from the gateway stubs.

Now that we've got a working Go gRPC server, we need to add the grpc-gateway annotations:

```proto
syntax = "proto3";

package helloworld;

import "google/api/annotations.proto";

// The greeting service definition.
service Greeter {
  // Sends a greeting
  rpc SayHello (HelloRequest) returns (HelloReply) {
        option (google.api.http) = {
        post: "/v1/example/echo"
        body: "*"
    };
  }
}

// The request message containing the user's name.
message HelloRequest {
  string name = 1;
}

// The response message containing the greetings
message HelloReply {
  string message = 1;
}
```

### Generating the grpc-gateway stubs

Now that we've got the grpc-gateway annotations added to the proto file, we need to use the grpc-gateway generator to generate the stubs.

Before we can do that, we need to copy some dependencies into our protofile structure. Copy the `third_party/googleapis` folder from the grpc-gateway repository to your local protofile structure. It should look like this afterwards:

''' (backticks)
proto/
helloworld/
hello_world.proto
google/
api/
http.proto
annotations.proto
''' (backticks)

#### Using buf

> [Using buf](generating_stubs/using_buf.md)

Reviewer: This isn't the right place for these links, we need to talk about what needs to be modified in these workflows for the generation of grpc-gateway stubs. In the case of buf:
```suggestion
We'll need to add the grpc-gateway generator to the generation configuration:
''' (backticks)
plugins:
   ... other plugins...
  - name: grpc-gateway
    out: proto
    opt: paths=source_relative
''' (backticks)

And that's it! Now if you run:

''' (backticks)
$ buf generate
'''

It should produce a `*.gw.pb.go` file.
```

#### Using protoc

> [Using protoc](generating_stubs/using_protoc.md)

Reviewer: Again, we need to write out what changed. I think it'll be something like this:
```suggestion
Now we need to add the grpc-gateway generator to the protoc invocation:

''' (backticks)
protoc -I ./proto \
    ... other plugins ...
    --grpc-gateway_out ./proto --grpc-gateway_opt paths=source_relative
    ./proto/helloworld/hello_world.proto
''' (backticks)

This should generate a `*.gw.pb.go` file.
```

> Start the greeter_server service first, and then start the gateway. Then gateway connects to greeter_server and establishes http monitoring.

Reviewer: Remove this, this doesn't make any sense. This is where we need to show the changes that need to be made to main.go now that we've got a generated gateway stub. I think it might be best not to refer to the boilerplate here, we should show the changes that are necessary (e.g. the RegisterBlaFromBla function call and subsequent serving of the HTTP server).

Then we use curl to send http requests:

```sh
curl -X POST -k http://localhost:8080/v1/example/echo -d '{"name": " world"}
```

```
{"message":"Hello  world"}
```

The process is as follows:

curl sends a request to the gateway with the post, gateway as proxy forwards the request to greeter_server through grpc, greeter_server returns the result through grpc, the gateway receives the result, and json returns to the front end.

> In this way, the transformation process from http json to internal grpc is completed through grpc-gateway.

Reviewer: Lets move this to a `## Testing the grpc-gateway` section at the bottom of the page.
